Hey, guys.
Welcome.
This is lecture 29.
In this lecture,
we're gonna be learning about merge.
So we'll learn how to merge data
sets by linking rows by keys.
So, we're gonna import the usual.
And from pandas import Series, DataFrame.
All right, so
let's make a quick data frame.
We'll call this data frame just dframe1.
We'll do that with a DataFrame and we're
gonna go ahead and pass a dictionary.
So in this dictionary, we'll set off key.
And I'm just gonna put in some letters for
the key, let's just say X, Z, Y,
Z and let's say just X X again.
Okay, and then the next entry in this
dictionary is gonna be the data set so
I'll just say data_set_1.
And I'll set this equal to np.range 6.
Let's go ahead and show that.
Okay, so, what happened here?
We created a data frame,
we did it through a dictionary.
Dictionary data frames,
you just set up your column name, and
then you just set up a list of
the data you want in that column.
So, the first column is data set,
second column is key.
Nice.
And then since we are going to be merging
data frames, we need more then one.
So, we'll make another data frame,
we'll call it dframe2.
And, we're going to do the same thing,
we'll pass a dictionary.
First entry we're gonna call key,
we'll pass three letters there,
Q, Y, and let's say Z.
And then we'll pass the next entry,
second data set,
and in this case, I'm just gonna
have to be a list of 1, 2, 3.
And then time dframe2 so
we can take a look at it.
All right.
So now we have data set and
then a column called key.
So now we can use the merge method and
this is a many to one method.
So the merge will automatically choose
overlapping columns to merge on.
To show you what I mean, I'm gonna
call the method merge using pd.merge,
and I'll call dframe1 and dframe2,
the two DataFrames we have.
Go ahead and see that.
Okay.
So what did merge do?
If we look at the original ones,
what are the keys they share?
So, dataframe1 has X, Z, and Y.
Dataframe2 has Q, Y, and Z.
So that means the only ones they have in
common are Z and Y as far as the keys.
And then if you look at their index, they
happen to also be similar on 0Z and 1Z.
So it merged those together and
automatically overlapped
where the keys matched.
And I just chose this column and
labeled it key for convenience so
you could realize where
it was being matched.
Okay, lo let's say I wanted to match on
a specific column, I could do that too.
Just by saying pd.merge,
you would enter the two dataframe names,
and then you can say on and
here you would choose which column
you would want to merge on.
So, in order to get the same result by
specifying this, I can specify to merge on
that column labeled key and I should get
the same result as the automatic merging.
And we did get the same result so
we know that works.
We can also choose which data
frames keys to use, and so
to show you what I mean by that,
let's go ahead and call pd.merge.
We'll create dframe1,
dframe2, and
then we'll say on the key column and
we can specify how.
So if I say how equal to left,
let's see how that looks.
We can past that left argument,
and let's see what happened there.
So now we've passed them
using the left data set.
So you can see the data sets, key values,
and index values are now being used.
So if we look at dframe2,
let's go ahead and find out why
there are certain null values.
So dframe2 had no X values,
so it's gonna say null for
all the X values of the data frame on
the left, and if we look a dframe1 and
look at its key column,
its key column was X, X, Y, Z, X, X.
And since we specified we wanted to
use that left data frame it's kept
the same key X,Z,Y,Z,X,X.
To make sure you understand lets go
ahead and pass the right data frame, so
the one on the left will be dframe1,
the one on the right will be dframe2.
We're gonna label it on key, and
how we'll label it now, right.
So we're going to pass using
the right data frames key.
So, lets go ahead and see what happens.
So, if we take a look at dframe2,
let's look at its key column,
it was key Y,Z, and
since we're Key,
it only passed Qs, Ys, and Zs.
And the reason Z here is doubled
was because it matched twice
on both data sets,
depending on the 0 index or the 1 index.
So now you can choose on either
data frame who's key column to use,
either the right or the left.
If you want to use both of them you
can create a union of both keys.
The way to do that is again just pass
the merge method, we'll call dframe1,
dframe2, and
then we'll label it on that key.
And then if we want to use
both the union of the keys,
we can label the method
how as an outer argument.
Ok.
And now we've been able to pass
the union of both the keys.
So the X's, the Z's, the Y's and the Qs.
Since data set 2 didn't
have any values for
X, it's still gonna show no values there.
So, now we're gonna learn how
to do a many to many merge.
For those of you familiar with SQL,
those terms will be familiar to you.
So, let's go ahead and
make another pair of data frames.
Let's see we're gonna have dframe3.
And let's go ahead and pass a dictionary.
We'll say key.
And we're just gonna input
then a bunch of letters again.
Let's say X,X,Y and then Z, Z and
then this one column, let's go ahead and
select data_set column.
This is data_set_3, and we'll just
set that up to be a range of 6 points.
Since we have one, two, three,
four, five, six on the key, so
we'll set that to be a range of 6.
Alt+Enter then let's
make another data frame.
We'll call it dframe4.
Let's go ahead and
see what we can do here.
Let's pass dictionary.
We'll label one of the columns key.
And now I'm gonna pass a shorter list.
I'll say Y, Y,
X, X, Z.
And let's make a fourth data set and
we'll set the values as a range of
five since our key is five long.
I need to use parenthesis there.
And let me go curly bracket to
finish that dictionary input.
Okay, so let's take a look at
what data frame three looks like.
Okay, and then let's take a look
at data frame four as well.
So these are the two data
frames we're gonna be using.
Look at how their keys are.
Got X X X Y Z Z on the third data set.
Third data frame and
YYXXZ on the fourth data frame, cool.
So let's go ahead and
merge them, see what happens,
pd.merge (dframe3,
dframe4) see what we get.
All right, so now the data sets
are merged based on both their index and
where they matched on that key column.
So you can see data set 3vand data set 4.
Those values are now on the same row.
If they were able to get matched
up by that key and by that index.
Now if you notice something else,
the values are a little different,
if you might have noticed.
So, for instance let's look at data
set 3 on 0 and data set 4 on 0.
And they were both 0on the key Y.
Now let's look where data
set had the key of Z.
So, you have data set 4 and
data set 3, key of Z.
Data set 4 was 4.
On that data set 3 was 5 on that.
And so now you can see they've
been matched up there.
You also had a 4 on data set 3.
So it got matched up.
And data set 4, it pulled that same
value to make that match on the Z.
So now you don't have a null value there.
Okay, so
we can also merge with multiple keys.
So I'm going to make another data frame.
So I'll say, df_left
equals DataFrame key1.
And let's go ahead and
pass some city initials as those values.
Then let's go ahead and make a second key.
And we're just gonna pass,
let's just say one, two,
just say one, two, one.
And then I'll make one last
entry into this dictionary.
I'll say the data itself,
set that equal to 10,
20, 30.
Okay.
And then let me just format this a bit so
it's easy to read for you guys.
So I have my key1, SF, SF,
LA, my key 2, one, two,
one, and then my data is 10, 20, 30.
Let's make another data frame.
We'll call it df_right.
We'll pass another dictionary here.
We'll say "key1".
We'll call it SF, SF, LA, LA.
Let's make another key2 and
then we'll just make it one, one.
Let's go ahead and
make it one, two after that.
And then lastly we'll have right data,
and we'll make the right data equal to
40 50, 60, 70.
Okay.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at those data frames
separately before we merge them.
So data frame left,
we made a key one and a key two column.
key1 is cities, key2 is just one, two and
one names, and then we have left data,
which is 10, 20, 30, dfright,
we have key1 against city initials,
key2, one, one, one, two, and
then right data, 40, 50, 60, 70.
So, let's see what
happens if we merge them.
So, if we're gonna merge
on multiple keys I
can input df_left,
my right data frame, and
then I'm gonna try to merge them
on both key one and key two.
So let's see what happens.
I can input a list for
multiple keys or column names.
So I'm gonna merge them on key1, key2, and
I'm gonna say outer, so
it does the union of those.
And let's see what happens.
So now, I have key1 and
key2, and the left data and
right data have been merged
to match up together by
their keys Right data had no data for
SF 2.
So if you look at the right data
there is no SF 2, there's only SF 1.
So it's going to give you a null for
that data there.
So using the above you can check multiple
data sets for multiple key combinations.
So for instance if you wanted to know, oh,
what did the left dataset have for LA one.
So you can look up LA, one, and
check that the left data set had 30 and
that the right data set had 60.
Okay, so
now you're gonna note that the left and
right dataframes have overlapping
key names, key1 and key2.
So can automatically add a suffix to them,
and we can do that by
just saying pd.merge,
df_left, df_right.
And let's just do it on one key this time,
e'll
say on key1.
So now we've merged those
data frames on key1.
So if you noticed, since I only merged
it on one key, and the rest of the data
frame still had multiple columns, and
they were named the same thing, so
each had a column named key2,
Pandas automatically added a suffix to it.
So it said for the left data frame one,
it gave it a suffix of underscore x,
and for the right data frame one,
it gave it a suffix of _y.
So if you accidentally
weren't paying attention or
you wanna do this on purpose and you just
only wanted to merge by one column, and
they happen to have two columns
that were named the same,
Pandas will automatically
keep them separated for you.
Okay, since there's the suffix,
if you didn't want it to be automatic,
and you wanted to specify what that
suffix was, you could merge it yourself.
So df_left, df_right.
Let's merge it on Key1, and
then we can also pass the argument suffix,
and we can decide what we
want that suffix to be.
So we can say lefty for the first one,
and then, _righty for the second one.
So instead of automatically saying _X,
_Y, you can say _lefty, _righty.
And let's see what happens when I do that.
And there you go, key2s were in both
of them, now you can choose the suffix
_lefty, _righty, or
whatever you want to decide to put there.
So, there's a ton of info on merge
parameters in the documentation.
So, if you want to check more stuff,
some more specific things,
you can check out the documentation,
the link is in the IPython notebook on
the GitHub link for the notebook viewer.
If you want we can just check
this out real quick on merge so
let's go ahead and check that out.
So, like I said, we have the how method,
we can label the indexes,
which indexes we want to use,
and choose the suffix to use
if there the same name index or
column on both of them.
All right, so
that's the basics of merging.
You just do pd.merge,
put in your two data frames,
define which key you wanna merge it on,
define how you wanna merge it either left,
right, or by the union of both keys and
then you can also choose a suffix for
each key to be merged.
So that's all you really need
to know as far as right now.
Next up, we're gonna learn how to merge
on the index and not by the columns.
I'll see you there.